arXiv:0912.0725v1 [astro-ph.CO] 3 Dec 2009

Lorentz symmetry violation, dark matter and dark energy
Luis Gonzalez-Mestresa
a

LAPP, Universit de Savoie, CNRS/IN2P3, B.P. 110, 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France e

Taking into account the experimental results of the HiRes and AUGER collaborations, the present status of bounds on Lorentz symmetry violation (LSV) patterns is discussed. Although significant constraints will emerge, a wide range of models and values of parameters will still be left open. Cosmological implications of allowed LSV patterns are discussed focusing on the origin of our Universe, the cosmological constant, dark matter and dark energy. Superbradyons (superluminal preons) may be the actual constituents of vacuum and of standard particles, and form equally a cosmological sea leading to new forms of dark matter and dark energy.

1. Patterns of Lorentz symmetry violation A formulation of Planck-scale Lorentz symmetry violation (LSV) testable in ultra-high energy cosmic-ray (UHECR) experiments was proposed in [1,2]. It involves two basic ingredients: i) the existence of a privileged local reference frame (the vacuum rest frame, VRF) ; ii) an energydependent parameter driving LSV and possibly making it observable in the ultra-high energy (UHE) region. Then, standard special relativity can remain a low-energy limit in the VRF, contrary to approaches where the critical speed in vacuum is not the same for all standard particles. A simple LSV pattern of the type proposed in [1,2] is quadratically deformed relativistic kinematics (QDRK), where the effective LSV parameter varies quadratically with energy. In the VRF, we can write: E = (2)-1 h c a-1 e (k a) (1)

particle. For p E

mc , one has:

p c + m2 c3 (2 p)-1 - p c  (k a)2 /2 (3)

E being the particle energy, h the Planck constant, c the speed of light, k the wave vector, a the fundamental length and [e (k a)]2 a convex function of (k a)2 . a can correspond to the Planck scale or to a smaller length scale. Expanding (1) for k a 1 , we get [2]: e (k a) [(k a)2 -  (k a)4 + (2 a)2 h-2 m2 c2 ]1/2 (2) where p is the particle momentum,  a positive model-dependent constant and m the mass of the 1

Kinematic balances are altered, potentially leading to observable phenomena, above a transition energy Etrans where the deformation term - p c  (k a)2 /2 becomes of the same order as the mass term m2 c3 (2 p)-1 . For this comparison to make sense, the existence on an absolute local rest frame is a fundamental requirement, even if the ansatz (1)-(3) can be a limit of many different basic theories. Assuming exact energy and momentum conservation, two important implications of QDRK for UHE particles were already emphasized in [1] : i) QDRK can lead to a suppression of the GreisenZatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cutoff [3,4] ; ii) unstable particles live longer at UHE than in standard special relativity, and some of them can even become stable at these energies. For such phenomenological applications, the Earth is assumed to move slowly with respect to the VRF. Subsequent papers [2,5,6] further discussed these issues and that of the universality of the  parameter. Particles with negative values of  could not be stable at UHE, or even at lower energies. Assuming  to be positive, particles with lower values of  would decay into those with larger . There would be at least one stable UHE particle, with the highest value of . A recent paper by Mattingly et al. [7] studies a particular application of this discussion to neutrinos. More obvious possibilities can be consid-

