BRX TH-614 CALT 68-2764

Circular Symmetry in Topologically Massive Gravity
S. Deser1 and J. Franklin2

arXiv:0912.0708v1 [gr-qc] 3 Dec 2009

Department, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454 and Lauritsen Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125 deser@brandeis.edu
2

1 Physics

Reed College, Portland, OR 97202, USA jfrankli@reed.edu
Abstract

We show that spherical/circular symmetry breaks topologically massive gravity (TMG) down to the separate vanishing of its constituent Einstein and Cotton sectors, effectively reducing it to GR alone, since GR implies vanishing Cotton tensor. Consequences include Birkhoff's theorem (time-independence), verified here for D = 3 GR, and absence of novel "Schwarzschild-TMG" metrics: only the GR solutions­conical spaces or their cosmological extensions, are allowed.

1

Introduction

Topologically massive gravity [1] and its cosmological extension [2] (collectively TMG) have always been counter-examples to much of our standard lore due to the synergy between its separately anemic Einstein and Cotton sectors in D = 3: GR implies flat or (AS)dS, pure Cotton implies the weaker conformally flat, space. Here, we will study the flip side, the case when the full model necessarily reduces to its separate parts, and its consequences. Specifically, we will see that circular symmetry has precisely the effect of splitting the single TMG equation into its two constituents. This will first be exploited to prove Birkhoff's theorem (B), which states that there is no monopole radiation in theories, in particular Maxwell's and Einstein's, that are devoid of monopole degrees of freedom [3]. There, gauge invariance leaves only massless helicity (±1,±2) modes respectively. Their massive extensions, having helicity 0 excitations, do permit radial radiation. Topologically massive vector (TME) and tensor (TMG) D = 3 models partake of both camps: they are gauge invariant, but have massive excitations. One would nevertheless expect them to obey B because, although massive, they have (single) helicities (1, 2) but not 0. As a warmup, we first establish B in TME and linearized TMG, then do so for full nonlinear TMG. As was also previously noted in [4], sector-splitting implies absence of "Schwarzschild-TMG" solutions beyond those of GR. There, it was shown more generally that splitting occurs in the presence of a hypersurface-orthogonal Killing vector Xµ ; our circular symmetry is the physically important concrete example, with Xµ = gµ . 1

