Core-crust transition pressure evolution in post-glitch epoch for a Vela-type pulsar
L. M. Gonzlez-Romero and J. L. Blzquez-Salcedo a a
Depto. F isica Terica II, Facultad de Ciencias F o isicas, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 28040-Madrid (Dated: December 3, 2009) We propose that the post-glitch epoch in a Vela-type pulsar corresponds to a transition time in which the broken crust is readjusting its temperature and core-crust transition pressure after the changes produced by the glitch. To describe the evolution of the pulsar in this epoch we use a sequence of stationary and axisymmetric relativistic models of slowly rotating neutron stars with a surface layer crust. Previously, we have formulated the matching conditions on the surface of the star in terms of physical properties (total mass of the star, core-crust transition pressure,...).

arXiv:0912.0628v1 [gr-qc] 3 Dec 2009

PACS numbers: 97.60.Gb, 97.60.Jd, 04.40.Dg, 95.30.Sf

Many pulsars show sudden spin jumps, glitches, which are superimposed to the gradual spin down due to the continued loss of angular momentum suffered by the star [1] . After a relaxation period of the order of hundreds of days (post-glitch epoch), the star almost recovers its usual rhythm of spin down. The study of the properties of both glitch and post-glitch epoch are essential to understand the structure of the neutron star that models the pulsar [2]. Glitches have been observed in most of the younger isolated pulsars. Particularly, more than a dozen glitches with period variation of the order of 10-8 and 10-6 have been observed in the Crab and Vela pulsars respectively since their discovery. Many mechanisms have been proposed to explain glitches [3] and post-glitch epoch [4]. Most of the models that deal with glitches are associated with the layer structure that neutron stars are thought to posses. Basically two regions of the star interior can be differentiated: the core and the crust. The properties of the crust are very different to those of the core, and it is thought that this region has a solid crystalline structure similar to a metal [5]. Let us mention that in the thermal glitch model proposed by Link and Epstein [3] the glitch is explained by a sudden deposition of thermal energy in the inner crust, energy that would come from a rupture of the solid crust. The inner crust superfluid is very sensitive to star quake generated temperature perturbations, affecting to the rotation behavior of the star. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the dynamical properties of the neutron star depend strongly on the transition pressure between the star's core and the crust as have been pointed up by Cheng, Yuan, and Zhang [6] and Lattimer and Prakash [7]. According with those two ideas, we propose that the post-glitch epoch can be understood as a transition time in which the broken crust is readjusting its temperature. The temperature excess that the inner layers of the crust has just after a glitch, would gradually dissipate during the post-glitch epoch until the crust reaches its equilibrium temperature. Our hypothesis is that the cooling of

the exterior layers of the star would lead to a sensitive variation of the transition pressure between the core and the crust. In consequence, the post-glitch epoch will correspond to a readjustment epoch for this transition pressure. Because many dynamical properties of the neutron star strongly depend on the core-crust transition pressure, the gradual cooling down of the inner layers of the crust would explain its evolution all along the post-glitch epoch. In order to be able to control the core-crust transition pressure, we will consider that the crust is thin enough so that we can treat it as a surface layer that envelops the star's core. We will consider the case of a relativistic star with rigid and slow rotation, so we can make use of Hartle and Thorne formalism [8]. The introduction of a surface layer of energy density will change the boundary conditions on the surface of the star. We will show that it is interesting to use the total mass, the central density and the core-crust transition pressure as the parameters that characterize a configuration. When performing the simulation of the post-glitch epoch, we must take into account that there are two very different time scales in the evolution of the star: the postglitch epoch duration, that is of the order of hundreds of days, in contrast with the rotation period of the star that is of the order of seconds or even milliseconds. This important feature allows us to approximate each evolution state of the star during the post-glitch epoch, using an hydrodynamic equilibrium configuration with the appropriate parameters (total mass, central density, and core-crust transition pressure). We will fit the evolution of the angular velocity of the star with a sequence of configurations of different core-crust transition pressure, assuming that neither the mass nor the central density changes during the post-glitch epoch. Model of a slowly rotating neutron star with a surface layer crust We assume that the neutron star is in permanent rigid rotation. The star rotates with constant angular velocity  around an axis, so the resulting space-time is ax-

