MONDian three-body predictions for LISA Pathfinder
Neil Bevis,1,  Joo Magueijo,1,  Christian Trenkel,2,  and Steve Kemble2 a
1

Theoretical Physics, Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College, London, SW7 2BZ, United Kingdom 2 Astrium Ltd, Gunnels Wood Road, Stevenage SG1 2AS, United Kingdom (Dated: December 3, 2009)

arXiv:0912.0710v1 [astro-ph.CO] 3 Dec 2009

In previous work it was shown that MOND theories predict anomalously strong tidal stresses near the saddle points of the Newtonian gravitational potential. An analytical examination of the saddle between two bodies revealed a linear and a non-linear solution, valid for the outer and inner regions. Here we present a numerical algorithm for solving the MOND equations. We check the code against the two-body analytical solutions and explore the region transitioning between them. We then develop a a realistic model for the MONDian effects on the saddles of the Sun-Earth-Moon system (including further sources is straightforward). For the Sun-Earth saddle we find that the two-body results are almost unchanged, with corrections increasing from full to new Moon. In contrast, the Moon saddle is an intrinsically three-body problem, but we numerically find a recipe for adapting the two-body solution to this case, by means of a suitable re-scaling and axis re-orientation. We explore possible experimental scenarios for LISA Pathfinder, and the prospect of a visit to the saddle(s) at the end of the mission. Given the chaotic nature of the orbits, awareness of the full range of the possibilities is crucial for a realistic prediction. We conclude that even with very conservative assumptions on the impact parameter, the accelerometers are abundantly sensitive to vindicate or rule out the theory.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND [1]) is a scheme that was first proposed for explaining observed dynamical properties of galaxies without invoking dark matter. The scheme was later incorporated into a proper theory with a Lagrangian formulation [2], but valid only in the non-relativistic regime. Still later a fully covariant gravitational theory was found containing MOND phenomenology as a non-relativistic limit. This theory was named TeVeS [3] and alternatives have been proposed (e.g. [4, 5, 6]). The observational features to be studied in this paper depend only on their (shared) non-relativistic limit. Constraints arising from lensing [7, 8, 9], or cosmology [10] have no bearing here and indicate issues arising from the relativistic extension of these theories. The opposition between MOND and dark matter leaves considerable doubts as to how to interpret new astrophysical and cosmological data. A fair comparison requires re-evaluating, within each approach, the whole set of assumptions underlying the new observations (see for example the controversy surrounding the bullet cluster [11, 12, 13, 14]). For this reason the debate would benefit from a direct probe, in the form of a laboratory or Solar System experiment. Such a perspective motivates widespread dark matter searches. The analogous "backyard" tests of MOND include searching for anomalies in planetary and spacecraft trajectories [15, 16, 17], stronger tidal stresses in the vicinity of saddle points of the Newtonian potential [18] or Solar System manifesta-

tions of the MOND external field effect [19]. In this paper we focus on the MONDian effects on the saddle points of the gravitational field, with particular emphasis on the region where the Earth and Sun pulls cancel (which, we stress, is not at the Lagrange point L1). We provide realistic predictions for the future LISA Pathfinder spacecraft [20], which could plausibly be redirected to the Earth-Sun saddle, once its primary goals at L1 have been completed. We also consider the possible benefits of re-direction to the saddle point near the Moon (there are not two separate Moon-Earth and Moon-Sun saddle points) and discuss its related practical issues. As already mentioned, the predictions we calculate stem from the non-relativistic limit of TeVeS [3]. For this theory gravity is described by the total potential  = N + , where N is the Newtonian potential and  is an additional MOND component. The latter is physically relevant only when | N | a0 , where a0 is the Milgrom acceleration [1], with a0  10-10 ms-1 in order to fit galaxy observations without dark matter. The extra field is governed by the non-linear Poisson equation: * [ ( | | /a0 ) ] = G (1)

 Electronic  Electronic

address: n.bevis@imperial.ac.uk address: magueijo@ic.ac.uk  Electronic address: Christian.Trenkel@astrium.eads.net

where  is the matter density,  is a constant parameter and G is the underlying gravitational constant. On the left-hand-side, (x) is an unknown function that must tend to 1 for x 1 but behaves like x for x 1 (but note that this function is not the ratio of the Newtonian and actual accelerations, which we will denote as ). We will  chose a particular form for (x) following Ref. [18] (see Eq. 5 in Section III of the present paper), and likewise take  = 0.03 throughout this article. In regions where | N | a0 , we have   1 and therefore  yields accelerations that are /4 times the Newtonian contribution. Hence by measuring the total gravitational force we would measure the Newtonian

