Quantum Fisher Information Flow and Non-Markovianity in Open Systems
Xiao-Ming Lu,1 Xiaoguang Wang,1, ∗ and C. P. Sun2, †
1

Zhejiang Institute of Modern Physics, Department of Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China 2 Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100080, China We propose to use the quantum Fisher information in characterizing the information ﬂow of open quantum systems. This information-theoretic approach provides a quantitative measure to statistically distinguish Markovian and non-Markovian processes. A basic relation between the QFI ﬂow and non-Markovianity is unveiled for quantum dynamics of open systems. For a class of time-local master equations, the exactly-analytic solution shows that the non-Markovianity is characterized by additive information sub-ﬂows in diﬀerent non-Markovian channels.

arXiv:0912.0587v1 [quant-ph] 3 Dec 2009

PACS numbers: 03.65.Yz, 03.65.Ta, 42.50.Lc

Introduction — Any system in the realistic world is open since it inevitably interacts with its environment. The quantum dynamic processes of open systems are simply classiﬁed into Markovian and non-Markovian ones according to the ways to lose energy or information [1]. In most situations, Markovian process uniquely determines its ﬁnal steady state as an thermal equilibrium [2], which is independent of its initial one. In this sense a Markovian process is essentially an information erasure process, thus tends to continuously reduce the distinguishability between any two initial states. However, Markovian description for open quantum system is only an approximation to most of actual processes, which are of non-Markovian. With many recent investigations about non-Markovian dynamics by making use of various analytical approaches and numerical simulations, a computable measure of “Markovianity” for quantum channels was introduced in Ref. [3]. Most recently, it was also recognized that diﬀerence between them can be measured through the continuous increment of the state distinguishability [4]. Then this increment is intuitively interpreted as the revival of information ﬂow between the bath and the system though there no quantitative information measure is utilized. Another approach based on entanglement is proposed in Ref. [5]. In this letter, the quantum Fisher information (QFI) ﬂow are used for directly characterizing the non-Markovianity of the quantum dynamics of open systems. Actually, in the system-plus-bath approach for open quantum systems, the eﬀective dynamics of the reduced density matrix ρ is induced by tracing over environment [1]. The simplest reduced dynamics is the quantum Markovian process described by dynamical semigroups [6]. Here, the reduced density matrix ρ at time t + dt is determined completely by the one at time t. Contrarily, the general reduced dynamics may be of nonMarkovian when the surrounding environment can retain a memory of the information about states at earlier times, and transfer it back to the system to aﬀect its evolution. In this sense the Markovian process only happen when the environmental correlation time is relatively short so that memory eﬀects can be neglected. These

memory-based consideration for the Markovian approximation also means that the information-theoretical characterizing of the non-Markovianity is a quite natural fashion. In this letter, we adopt the quantum Fisher information (QFI) to characterize the statistical distinguishability of reduced density matrix [7, 8]. An intuitive picture of the non-Markovian behavior then immediately follows from the dynamic return of the QFI, which is depicted by the QFI ﬂow. For a class of the non-Markovian master equations in time-local forms, we exactly calculate the information ﬂows for these cases. The analytic results show that the total QFI ﬂow can be decomposed into the split contributions from diﬀerent dissipative modes. On the other hand, because the QFI is equivalent to the Bures metric on the Riemannian manifold of density operators, the present approach is geometrical [8]. We also point out this approach is feasible to work for understanding the problems in the quantum metrology [9]. Quantum Fisher information in non-Markovian dynamics — We consider a class of quantum processes described by the following time-local master equation [4] ∂ ρ(t) = K(t)ρ(t), ∂t (1)

where K(t) is a super-operator acting on the reduced density matrix ρ(t) as [10, 11] K(t)ρ = −i [H, ρ] + γi Ai ρA† − i 1 A† Ai , ρ i 2 , (2)

i

where H(t) is the Hermitian Hamiltonian for the open quantum system without the couplings to the bath. {·, ·} denotes the anti-commutator. If all γi and Ai are time independent, and all γi are positive, equation (2) is the conventional master equation in the Lindblad form [10], which describes the conventional Markovian process. However, by making use of a variety of methods, like the time-convolutionless projection operator technique [12] and Feynman-Vervon inﬂuence functional theory [13], the parameters γi = γi (t) and Ai = Ai (t) in the time-local

