IFIC/09-63 December 3, 2009

¯ Heavy colored resonances in tt + jet at the LHC

arXiv:0912.0687v1 [hep-ph] 3 Dec 2009

Paola Ferrario ∗ and Germ´ n Rodrigo † a Instituto de F´sica Corpuscular, UVEG - Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient´ﬁcas, ı ı Apartado de Correos 22085, E-46071 Valencia, Spain.

Abstract The LHC is the perfect environment for the study of new physics in the top quark sector. We study the possibility of detecting signals of heavy color-octet vector resonances, through the charge ¯ ¯ asymmetry, in tt+jet events. Besides contributions with the tt pair in a color-singlet state, the asym2 metry gets also contributions which are proportional to the color factor fabc . This process is particularly interesting for extra-dimensional models, where the inclusive charge asymmetry generated by Kaluza-Klein excitations of the gluon vanishes at the tree level. We ﬁnd that the statistical signiﬁcance for the measurement of such an asymmetry is sizable for different values of the coupling constants and already at low energies.

1 Introduction
The physics of the top quark is one of the most promising research ﬁelds at hadronic colliders such as the Tevatron at Fermilab or the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. Its huge mass compared with the other quarks, and of the same order as the Higgs boson vacuum expectation value, suggests that it can play an important role in the electroweak symmetry breaking. Since its discovery at Tevatron in 1995, it has been extensively studied and its properties have been measured with better and better precision. However, the optimal environment to perform top quark measurements is the LHC, due to its high energy reach (14 TeV center-of-mass energy at full activity). At the LHC a great amount of top-antitop quark pairs will be produced, thus allowing to develop analyses with high statistic. There, physics at the TeV scale will be widely explored, carrying to a better determination of the Standard Model (SM) as well as, possibly, discovery of new physics. Several models predict the existence of heavy colored resonances decaying to top-antitop quark pairs, that in principle can be detected at the LHC, like axigluons [1] and colorons [2] or Kaluza–Klein excitations in extra dimensional models [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. So far, masses under roughly 1 TeV have been
∗ †

E-mail: paola.ferrario@iﬁc.uv.es E-mail: german.rodrigo@iﬁc.uv.es

1

