Glueballs, gluon condensate, and pure glue QCD below Tc
Fabien Buisseret∗
Service de Physique Nucl´aire et Subnucl´aire, Universit´ de Mons, e e e Acad´mie universitaire Wallonie-Bruxelles, Place du Parc 20, B-7000 Mons, Belgium e (Dated: December 3, 2009) A quasiparticle description of pure glue QCD thermodynamics at T ≤ Tc is proposed and compared to recent lattice data. Given that a gas of glueballs with constant mass cannot quantitatively reproduce the early stages of the deconﬁnement phase transition, the problem is to identify a relevant mechanism leading to the observed sudden increase of the pressure, trace anomaly, etc. It is shown that the strong decrease of the gluon condensate near Tc combined with the increasing thermal width of the lightest glueballs might be the trigger of the phase transition.
PACS numbers: 12.38.Mh, 12.39.Mk Keywords: Glueballs; Gluon plasma; Phase transition

arXiv:0912.0678v1 [hep-ph] 3 Dec 2009

I.

INTRODUCTION

The phenomenology related to the deconﬁnement phase transition from hadronic matter to quark-gluon plasma (QGP) at high enough temperatures or densities is a very active ﬁeld of research since the beginnings of QCD, with pioneering works such as Refs. [1, 2]. On the experimental side, the QCD matter is currently studied in heavy-ion collisions at RHIC and SPS, and results from the LHC can also be hoped in the future [3]. The results obtained at RHIC so far suggest that a new phase has indeed been observed, that behaves like an almost perfect ﬂuid rather than a weakly interacting gas, as expected from phenomenological approaches [4]. On a theoretical side, much work has been devoted to the understanding of the QGP, within several frameworks: Perturbative methods, quasiparticle models, AdS/CFT duality, lattice QCD, . . . [5, 6]. Apart from its intrinsic interest, the knowledge of the QCD equation of state (EoS) has eventually applications in astrophysics, to decide for example whether the core of some neutron stars can consist in a QGP or not, or in cosmology in order to understand how and when the Universe hadronized. In principle, the most powerful nonperturbative technique for such a study is lattice QCD. The EoS of pure glue SU(3) QCD has been computed on the lattice more than a decade ago [7], while more detailed data have recently been obtained in Ref. [8], with gauge groups ranging from SU(3) to SU(8). Many other calculations of the QCD EoS have also been performed including quarks ﬂavors, at zero chemical potential or not [6]. Among the various existing phenomenological approaches, quasiparticle models rely on the assumption that the QGP can be seen as a gas of deconﬁned quarks and gluons. Since pioneering works [9], they have been shown to be able to reproduce the various EoS computed in lattice QCD at T ≥ Tc . It is thus tempting to apply such models to describe the QCD EoS below Tc . In that range however, the situation is less clear. Being in the conﬁned phase, the QCD matter should rather be modeled by a hadron gas. Let us focus on the pure glue case, which already captures the essential physical features of the problem, without involving extra technical diﬃculties due to the presence of quarks. Then, the hadronic matter should intuitively be thought as an ideal glueball gas whose thermodynamical features are dominated by the lowest-lying glueballs: Bose-Einstein statistics tells us indeed that the contribution of a glueball of mass mg and spin Jg is roughly proportional to (2Jg + 1)e−mg /T . However, by naively putting in such a model the glueball masses obtained in lattice QCD [10], one fails to reproduce the strong increase of the thermodynamical variables near Tc , as already pointed out in Refs. [11, 12]. One way of getting a model in agreement with the lattice data is to assume a high-lying glueball of Hagedorn-type [11]. The exponential growth of the number of states with mass mg then compensates the statistical suppression and brings a large enough contribution near Tc . But one has to accept that glueballs are excitations of a closed string, which is not so obvious, partly in view of the many models reproducing the lattice spectrum at zero temperature by assuming totally diﬀerent frameworks [13]. In this work, a new way of understanding the early stages of the pure glue phase transition (T Tc ) is proposed. A Hagedorn glueball spectrum is not assumed. Therefore, only the lightest glueballs, that all models ﬁnd to be the scalar and tensor ones, are assumed to bring a signiﬁcant contribution to the EoS. As it will be shown, two ingredients

∗ FNRS

Research Fellow; E-mail: fabien.buisseret@umons.ac.be

Typeset by REVTEX

