Canonical Horn Representations and Query Learning
Marta Arias1 and Jos L. Balczar2 e a
LARCA Research Group, Departament LSI Universitat Politcnica de Catalunya, Spain e marias@lsi.upc.edu Departamento de Matemticas, Estad a istica y Computacin o Universidad de Cantabria, Spain joseluis.balcazar@unican.es
1

2

Abstract. We describe an alternative construction of an existing canonical representation for definite Horn theories, the Guigues-Duquenne basis (or GD basis), which minimizes a natural notion of implicational size. We extend the canonical representation to general Horn, by providing a reduction from definite to general Horn CNF. We show how this representation relates to two topics in query learning theory: first, we show that a well-known algorithm by Angluin, Frazier and Pitt that learns Horn CNF always outputs the GD basis independently of the counterexamples it receives; second, we build strong polynomial certificates for Horn CNF directly from the GD basis.

1

Introduction

The present paper is the result of an attempt to better understand the classic algorithm by Angluin, Frazier, and Pitt [2] that learns propositional Horn formulas. A number of intriguing questions remain open regarding this algorithm; in particular, we were puzzled by the following one: along a run of the algorithm, queries made by the algorithm depend heavily upon the counterexamples selected as answers to the previous queries. It is therefore natural to expect the outcome of the algorithm to depend on the answers received along the run. However, attempts at providing an example of such behavior consistently fail. In this paper we prove that such attempts must in fact fail: we describe a canonical representation of Horn functions in terms of implications, and show that the algorithm of [2] always outputs this particular representation. It turns out that this canonical representation is well-known in the field of Formal Concepts, and bears the name of the authors that, to the best of our knowledge, first described it: the Guigues-Duquenne basis or GD basis [7, 12]. In addition, the GD basis has the important quality of being of minimum size. The GD basis is defined for definite Horn formulas only. We extend the notion of GD basis to general Horn formulas by means of a reduction from general to
Work partially supported by MICINN projects SESAAME-BAR (TIN2008-06582C03-01) and FORMALISM (TIN2007-66523).
R. Gavald et al. (Eds.): ALT 2009, LNAI 5809, pp. 156-170, 2009. a c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

